Best braintrust alternatives blog post (#18381)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/best-braintrust-alternatives.mdx

Reviewer: I think you overrate how important a feature release-blocking gates in this piece overall 😅

Reviewer: Do you think that

Evaluation datasets
Create datasets for testing and benchmarking outputs

Experiment runs
Run evaluation pipelines across datasets

Are pretty similar? I'm looking for ways to make the table slightly smaller. "Testing" sort of covers experiments, or you could change wording to "experimentation"

---
title: 'The best Braintrust alternatives & competitors, compared'
date: 2026-07-09
author:
    - natalia-amorim
rootpage: /blog
featuredImage: >-
    https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/hog_ql.png
featuredImageType: full
category: General
tags:
    - Comparisons
seo:
  metaTitle: 'The best Braintrust alternatives & competitors, compared'
  metaDescription: 'Looking for a Braintrust alternative? Compare the best AI observability and evals tools, including PostHog, Langfuse, LangSmith, and more.'
---

> **Braintrust** built an eval-first platform good enough that Notion, Vercel, and Cloudflare all use it, fast enough that it needed its own database, and funded well enough to keep going for a long time. If evals are your whole problem, you could do a lot worse.

Reviewer: "funded well enough to keep going for a long time" is weird

> But evals usually aren't the whole problem. Maybe you hit the free tier's edge and discovered the next stop is $249/month, no middle rung. Maybe you asked about self-hosting and got routed to Enterprise sales. Or maybe you realized "the eval passed" and "the user was happy" are two different metrics, and Braintrust only tracks one of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But evals usually aren't the whole problem. Maybe you hit the free tier's limit and discovered the next step is $249/month, no middle rung. Maybe you asked about self-hosting and got routed to Enterprise sales. Or maybe you realized "the eval passed" and "the user was happy" are two different metrics, and Braintrust only tracks one of them.
```

- **Typical customers:** Mid-size B2Bs and startups

![PostHog AI Observability](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/w_1600,c_limit,q_auto,f_auto/Clean_Shot_2026_06_22_at_13_19_01_2x_acc4617c50.png)

### What is PostHog?

**[PostHog](/)** (that's us 👋) is the leading platform for self-driving products. You can use our desktop ([Code](/code)), [web](/ai), [Slack](/slack), and [MCP](/mcp) products to leverage tools like [AI observability](/ai-observability), [product analytics](/product-analytics), [session replay](/session-replay), [feature flags](/feature-flags), [experiments](/experiments), [error tracking](/error-tracking), [logs](/logs), and more.

PostHog captures full traces of your LLM calls, so you can follow a request through every prompt, tool call, and model response. For each generation, it tracks token usage, cost, latency, and errors, and you can score outputs with [LLM-as-a-judge or code-based evals](/docs/ai-evals) to catch quality regressions. 

You can also [manage and version prompts (beta)](/docs/prompt-management) without redeploying code, and query trace data with SQL or through the [MCP server](/mcp) directly from your editor.

> The difference from Braintrust is what surrounds the traces. Braintrust is purpose-built for the eval loop. PostHog expands on the loop after that: the model shipped, so now what? 

Reviewer: "purpose-built for the eval loop" is fancy sounding words but I don't really know what you mean.

### Key features

- [**AI evals**](/docs/ai-evals/evaluations): Automatically score model outputs using LLM-as-a-judge or code-based checks to track quality and identify regressions over time.

- [**Generations**](/docs/ai-observability/generations): Monitor model performance, token usage, costs, latency, and errors across your AI features from a single view.

- [**Traces**](/docs/ai-observability/traces): Follow AI workflows from start to finish to understand how requests move through prompts, tools, and model calls.

- [**Prompt management**](/docs/prompt-management) *(beta):* Create, version, and update prompts without redeploying code. Compare versions and understand how prompt changes affect outputs.

- [**SQL access**](/docs/sql): Query AI observability data with SQL and analyze it alongside product, user, and business data.

- [**Session replay**](/docs/ai-observability/link-session-replay): Watch recordings of users interacting with AI features and investigate issues alongside the actions that triggered them.

> - [**PostHog AI:**](/ai) Query your product data in plain English, build dashboards, write SQL, and create insights by having a conversation instead of clicking through menus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**PostHog AI:**](/ai) Query your data in plain English, build dashboards, write SQL, and create insights by having a conversation instead of clicking through menus.
```

2. **Pricing is clear and scalable:** PostHog uses usage-based pricing with no per-seat charges and a generous free tier. Eligible startups can also receive an additional $50,000 in free credits.

3. **It connects AI performance to user behavior:** Teams see not just what their LLM is doing, but how users interact with AI features, where they drop off, what drives retention, and how prompt changes affect product metrics.

> #### Bottom line
>
> PostHog is the best Braintrust alternative for teams that want AI observability integrated into the full product development stack. If you want to track LLM performance, prompt changes, and user behavior in one place, PostHog is the strongest option on this list.

<WizardCTA />

## 2. Langfuse

- **Founded:** 2022
- **Similar to:** Braintrust, LangSmith, Arize Phoenix
- **Typical users:** Engineers building and debugging LLM applications and agents
- **Typical customers:** Startups and enterprises with strict data residency requirements

![Langfuse](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/langfuse_92ec8c1295.png)

### What is Langfuse?

> Founded in Berlin in 2022 and acquired by ClickHouse in January 2026, [Langfuse](/blog/posthog-vs-langfuse) is an open source LLM engineering platform covering observability, prompt management, and evaluation.

Reviewer: I think we already cover the founded bit above
```suggestion
Acquired by ClickHouse in January 2026, [Langfuse](/blog/posthog-vs-langfuse) is an open source LLM engineering platform covering observability, prompt management, and evaluation.
```

[Langfuse](/blog/best-langfuse-alternatives) captures detailed traces of LLM calls with spans, observations, and metrics across any framework or provider. Its SDK is built on the official OpenTelemetry client, so token usage, cost tracking, and prompt linking work with any OTel-compatible library out of the box. 

On top of tracing, it layers prompt management with one-click rollbacks, evaluations via LLM-as-a-judge, heuristics, or human review, and CI/CD experiment actions for catching quality regressions in your pipeline.

> Against Braintrust specifically, Langfuse is the mirror image on licensing: what Braintrust gates behind an Enterprise contract (self-hosting, full data control) is Langfuse's default. On the other hand, Braintrust's eval loop is more tightly integrated out of the box, while Langfuse's equivalent workflows take more configuration to assemble.

Reviewer: Mirror image is sort of weird wording that takes some processing, could we say something different?

    rows={[
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_evaluations',
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.llm_as_a_judge',
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.code_evaluators',
        'ai_observability.features.evaluation_datasets',
        'ai_observability.evaluations.features.experiment_runs',
        {
            label: 'CI-integrated evals',
            description: 'Run evaluation suites in CI/CD before merging or deploying changes',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        'ai_observability.features.trace_visualization',
        'ai_observability.features.agent_tracing',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_management',
        'ai_observability.features.ai_gateway_proxy',
        'ai_observability.features.cost_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.latency_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.error_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.session_replay',
        'ai_observability.features.product_analytics',
        'platform.deployment.open_source',
        'platform.deployment.eu_hosting',
    ]}
/>
</p>

<details>
<summary>Main differences between Langfuse and Braintrust</summary>

> - Langfuse is MIT-licensed and fully self-hostable at no cost. Braintrust is closed-source, with self-hosting available only on Enterprise.

Reviewer: Self-hosting is never no cost (servers cost money)
```suggestion
- Langfuse is MIT-licensed and fully self-hostable by anyone. Braintrust is closed-source, with self-hosting available only on Enterprise.
```

1. **It removes blind spots in agent workflows:** Detailed tracing is critical for understanding which context is pulled into agent workflows and how decisions are made at every step.

2. **Self-hosting is a first-class option:** The open-source, self-hosted path means data never leaves your own infrastructure, without sacrificing enterprise-grade observability.

3. **It has the most detailed latency and analytics:** Reviewers recommend it for complex chains or user-facing chat applications where latency visibility is critical.

> #### Bottom line
>
> Langfuse is the strongest open-source Braintrust alternative for teams that want full control over their data and infrastructure, broad framework support, and a self-hosted path that doesn't require an enterprise contract.

## 3. LangSmith

- **Founded:** 2023
- **Similar to:** Braintrust, Langfuse, Arize Phoenix
- **Typical users:** Engineers building and deploying LLM applications and agents
- **Typical customers:** Startups and enterprises shipping production LLM applications

![LangSmith Dashboard](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Langsmith_Dashboard_09ad5e1ab0.png)

### What is LangSmith?

> [LangSmith](/blog/best-langsmith-alternatives) is the observability and evaluation platform from the LangChain team, and the closest thing Braintrust has to a direct rival. 

Reviewer: I don't think the rival bit is true

> Both are closed-source, eval-focused platforms with CI-integrated quality gates; the difference is LangSmith is anchored to the LangChain ecosystem, enabling zero-config tracing, node-by-node state diffs, and native agent execution trees.

Reviewer: I don't get the sense that LangSmith is an eval-focused platform anymore than the other tools.

- LangSmith includes a managed agent deployment service. Braintrust does not.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Main similarities between LangSmith and Braintrust</summary>

- Both support CI-integrated eval workflows with GitHub Actions.
- Both offer LLM-as-judge evaluation, human annotation queues, and dataset management.
- Both capture full LLM traces with inputs, outputs, token usage, cost, and latency.
- Both have prompt management and version control.
- Both have a free tier and usage-based pricing.

</details>

### Why do companies use LangSmith?

According to [reviews on Gartner Peer Insights](https://www.gartner.com/reviews/market/ai-engineering-platforms/vendor/langchain/product/langsmith), companies use LangSmith because:

1. **Removes the guesswork from production debugging:** Every model response is visible step by step, making it easier to catch and fix issues before they compound.

2. **Full visibility into agent behavior:** Every agent action and trace is captured, making it straightforward to monitor behavior and ensure consistency in production.

> 3. **Significantly shorter debugging cycles:** Klarna reduced customer resolution times by [80%](https://blog.langchain.com/customers-klarna/) after adopting LangSmith.

Reviewer: I don't really want to give a backlink to a competitor. 
```suggestion
3. **Significantly shorter debugging cycles:** A LangSmith customer story showed that Klarna reduced customer resolution times by 80% after adoption.
```

> #### Bottom line
>

> > LangSmith is the strongest Braintrust alternative for teams already using LangChain or LangGraph. Outside that ecosystem, the advantage over other tools in this list narrows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> LangSmith is the strongest Braintrust alternative for teams already using LangChain or LangGraph. Outside that ecosystem, their limited free tier makes other tools on this list more appealing.
```

3. **Non-technical stakeholders can see the value of AI directly:** Arize makes it possible to report outcome statistics to dashboards, so business teams can see the value AI brings without needing to ask an engineer to dig into the data.

> #### Bottom line
>
> Arize Phoenix is the strongest Braintrust alternative for teams that want source-available, OTel-native LLM observability, or when both traditional ML and LLM monitoring need to live on one platform.

## 5. Opik by Comet

- **Founded:** 2024
- **Similar to:** Braintrust, Langfuse, LangSmith
- **Typical users:** AI engineers and data scientists building and monitoring LLM applications
- **Typical customers:** Startups and enterprises building production LLM applications and agents

![Opik by Comet dashboard](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/opik_comet_dashboard_llm_traces_evaluation_scores_b618d8822b.png)

### What is Opik?

> **Opik** is an open-source LLM observability and evaluation platform built by Comet, a company with over a decade of ML experiment tracking behind it. It covers the full lifecycle from local experimentation to production monitoring at high trace volumes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Opik** is an open-source LLM observability and evaluation platform built by Comet, a company with over a decade of ML experiment tracking. It covers the full lifecycle from local experimentation to production monitoring at high trace volumes.
```

Opik scores production traces in real time with built-in metrics for hallucination, relevance, and task completion, routes outputs to subject-matter experts via annotation queues, and ships guardrails that screen for PII and policy violations before responses reach users.

Ollie, Opik's coding agent, analyzes traces and writes fixes directly to your codebase with a regression test for every fix. And their Agent Optimizer automates prompt tuning against your own eval data, instead of leaving it to manual trial and error.

> Against Braintrust, the comparison matches Langfuse's: Apache 2.0 and fully self-hostable versus closed source with hybrid Enterprise-only self-hosting. What Opik adds is automation: where Braintrust's Loop suggests scorers, Ollie ships code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Against Braintrust, the comparison matches Langfuse's: Apache 2.0 and fully self-hostable versus closed source with hybrid Enterprise-only self-hosting. Opik adds automation; where Braintrust's Loop suggests scorers, Ollie ships code.
```

### Key features

- **LLM tracing:** Capture every LLM call, tool execution, and agent step with full input/output, token counts, cost, and latency.

- **Evaluations:** Score outputs with LLM-as-judge, built-in hallucination and relevance metrics, or custom evaluators.

> - **Online evaluation:** Automatically score production traces using real-time evaluation rules as traffic flows in.

Reviewer: Repetitive
```suggestion
- **Online evaluation:** Automatically score production traces using real-time evaluation rules.
```

- Braintrust blocks deployments automatically when eval scores regress. Opik supports CI integration but does not offer deployment blocking.
- Opik's Ollie coding agent analyzes traces and writes fixes directly to your codebase. Braintrust has no equivalent automated optimization feature.
- Opik's free cloud tier includes 25K spans/month with unlimited team members. Braintrust's free tier includes 1GB of processed data/month.
- Opik is backed by Comet's MLOps platform for engineers running both ML experiments and LLM applications. Braintrust is LLM-only.
- Opik is Apache 2.0 open-source and fully self-hostable with no feature limitations. Braintrust is closed-source with self-hosting on Enterprise only.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Main similarities between Opik and Braintrust</summary>

- Both offer LLM tracing with inputs, outputs, token usage, cost, and latency.
- Both support LLM-as-judge evaluation and dataset management.
- Both have prompt management and CI/CD integration for running evaluations.
- Both have a free tier and usage-based pricing.
- Both support OpenAI, Anthropic, and other major LLM providers.

</details>

### Why do companies use Opik?

> According to Opik customer stories, companies use Opik because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to customer stories, companies use Opik because:
```

> According to Opik customer stories, companies use Opik because:

Reviewer: It's not the end of the world, but I don't really like using customer stories here, I'd rather use something neutral, Reddit even. Don't need to change this one though.

3. **Cost optimization becomes measurable:** Pattern's AI Ops team used Opik to run side-by-side model comparisons and identify a more cost-effective model without sacrificing performance.

> #### Bottom line
>
> Opik is the strongest Braintrust alternative for engineers that want a fully open-source, self-hostable LLM observability platform with real-time evaluation and automated agent optimization built in.

## 6. W&B Weave

- **Founded:** 2024
- **Similar to:** Braintrust, Langfuse, Opik
- **Typical users:** ML engineers and AI developers building and monitoring LLM applications
- **Typical customers:** Enterprises with both ML and LLM workloads, including OpenAI, Meta, NVIDIA, and Microsoft

![Weights & Biases Weave Dashboard](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Weights_and_Biases_Weave_dashboard_ba22386509.png)

### What is W&B Weave?

**W&B Weave** is the LLM observability and evaluation product from Weights & Biases, an AI developer platform used by over one million developers worldwide. 

> W&B rebuilt Weave from the ground up in June 2026 to focus specifically on production agent observability, with Weave sitting inside a broader ML development platform where model training, fine-tuning, and production LLM monitoring all connect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
W&B rebuilt Weave from the ground up in June 2026 to focus specifically on production agent observability. Weave now sits inside a broader ML development platform where model training, fine-tuning, and production LLM monitoring all connect.
```

            values: ['Partial', true],
        },
        'ai_observability.features.trace_visualization',
        'ai_observability.features.agent_tracing',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_management',
        'ai_observability.features.ai_gateway_proxy',
        'ai_observability.features.cost_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.latency_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.error_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.session_replay',
        'ai_observability.features.product_analytics',
        'platform.deployment.open_source',
        'platform.deployment.eu_hosting',
    ]}
/>
</p>

<details>
<summary>Main differences between W&B Weave and Braintrust</summary>

- Weave connects LLM application monitoring directly to ML model training and experiment tracking. Braintrust is LLM-only.
- Weave's built-in production signals automatically surface failure modes across millions of traces. Braintrust requires manual evaluation setup.
- Braintrust's eval-first CI workflow and dataset management are more tightly integrated. Weave's eval framework is comprehensive but secondary to its observability focus.

> - Braintrust's free tier includes 1GB of processed data/month. Weave's free tier is usage-based.

Reviewer: Any free usage?

2. **It covers agent traceability without overcomplicating things:** Weave handles agent traceability well, and most users find it does exactly what it promises.

3. **W&B delivers more than a product:** The platform goes beyond tooling, codifying an entire AI development strategy that connects model training, evaluation, and production monitoring end to end.

> #### Bottom line
>
> W&B Weave is the strongest Braintrust alternative for engineers already on the W&B platform who need ML experiment tracking and LLM observability unified in one place.

## 7. Confident AI

- **Founded:** 2024
- **Similar to:** Braintrust, LangSmith, Opik
- **Typical users:** Engineering, QA, and product teams building and evaluating LLM applications
- **Typical customers:** Mid-size and enterprise teams shipping AI features, including Panasonic, Toshiba, BCG, and CircleCI

![Confident AI dashboard](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/confident_ai_online_evaluations_metrics_collection_ec7b80ff46.png)

### What is Confident AI?

> **Confident AI** is an LLM evaluation and observability platform built by the creators of DeepEval, the most widely used open-source LLM evaluation framework. Backed by Y Combinator and founded in 2024, every production trace is scored against 50+ research-backed metrics open-sourced through DeepEval, covering agents, chatbots, RAG pipelines, safety, and multi-turn conversations.

Reviewer: I think nearly every alternative on this list was backed by YC but ok
```suggestion
**Confident AI** is an LLM evaluation and observability platform backed by Y Combinator and built by the creators of DeepEval, the most widely used open-source LLM evaluation framework. Every production trace is scored against 45+ research-backed metrics open-sourced through DeepEval, covering agents, chatbots, RAG pipelines, safety, and multi-turn conversations.
```

The distinctive design choice is who gets to run evals. Where most platforms assume an engineer is driving, Confident AI exposes evaluation workflows through an HTTP-based interface that PMs, QA, and domain experts can own directly – curating datasets from production traces, running experiments, and reviewing results without filing a ticket. 

It also monitors continuously rather than on demand: every production trace gets scored, alerts fire when quality drops below thresholds (not just when latency spikes), and multi-turn simulation generates realistic conversations with tool use and branching paths for testing conversational AI before it ships.

Against Braintrust, the two are the most eval-obsessed platforms on this list, but they're organized around different loops. Braintrust is built for the engineering loop: prompt iteration, CI gates, deploy blocking. Confident AI is built for the quality loop: continuous scoring in production, owned by whoever owns quality, which is sometimes not the person who owns the code.

### Key features

> - **50+ research-backed metrics:** Every production trace is scored against research-backed metrics covering faithfulness, hallucination, relevance, bias, toxicity, tool selection accuracy, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **45+ research-backed metrics:** Every production trace is scored against research-backed metrics covering faithfulness, hallucination, relevance, bias, toxicity, tool selection accuracy, and more.
```

            description: 'Run evaluation suites in CI/CD before merging or deploying changes',
            values: [true, true],
        },
        'ai_observability.features.trace_visualization',
        'ai_observability.features.agent_tracing',
        'ai_observability.features.prompt_management',
        'ai_observability.features.ai_gateway_proxy',
        'ai_observability.features.cost_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.latency_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.error_tracking',
        'ai_observability.features.session_replay',
        'ai_observability.features.product_analytics',
        'platform.deployment.open_source',
        'platform.deployment.eu_hosting',
    ]}
/>
</p>

<details>
<summary>Main differences between Confident AI and Braintrust</summary>

- Confident AI enables PMs and QA to run evals independently via HTTP. Braintrust evaluation workflows require engineering involvement.
- Braintrust's prompt iteration and CI-gated deploy workflow is more mature. Confident AI focuses on continuous quality monitoring.
- Confident AI scores every production trace with research-backed metrics. Braintrust requires a manual evaluation setup.

> - Confident AI's tracing costs $1/GB-month. Braintrust's Pro plan costs $249/month with $3/GB overages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Confident AI's tracing costs $10 per month plus $1 per GB. Braintrust's Pro plan costs $249/month with $3/GB overages.
```

- Braintrust has Brainstore, a purpose-built trace database. Confident AI uses standard cloud infrastructure.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Main similarities between Confident AI and Braintrust</summary>

- Both offer LLM tracing with inputs, outputs, token usage, cost, and latency.
- Both support LLM-as-judge evaluation and dataset management.
- Both have CI/CD integration for blocking deployments on quality regressions.
- Both have a free tier and usage-based pricing.
- Both support OpenAI, Anthropic, and other major LLM providers.

</details>

### Why do companies use Confident AI?

According to reviews on Gartner Peer Insights and customer stories, companies use Confident AI because:

1. **Evaluation cycles shrink from days to hours:** A single improvement cycle that previously took 10 days now takes three hours, with product managers running it themselves.

> 2. **It saves hundreds of hours of manual evaluation:** Confident AI saves 480+ hours of manual AI evaluation every month, giving teams the data to defend every quality decision.

Reviewer: This isn't a very good one, it's sort of dangling there

Reviewer: maybe it's fine if you just don't include the number

3. **The dashboard is accessible to non-technical users:** The interface is clean, well-structured, and easy to navigate, with AI-driven analytics providing clear, data-backed recommendations.

> #### Bottom line
>
> Confident AI is the strongest Braintrust alternative for cross-functional teams that want every production trace scored and evaluation workflows accessible to PMs and QA without engineering involvement.

## Which Braintrust alternative should you choose?

> - Want LLM observability connected to product analytics, session replay, and user behavior? [PostHog](/ai-observability).

Reviewer: Don't we usually have a verb here like "Choose PostHog" ?

- Building on LangChain or LangGraph? **LangSmith**.
- Want OpenTelemetry-native tracing or need ML and LLM monitoring on one platform? **Arize Phoenix**.
- Need open-source LLM observability with real-time evaluation and automated agent optimization? **Opik by Comet**.
- Already using W&B for ML experiment tracking? **W&B Weave**.
- Want every production trace scored and evaluation workflows accessible to PMs and QA? **Confident AI**.

## Is PostHog right for you?

Here's the (short) sales pitch.

We're biased, obviously, but we think PostHog is the right Braintrust alternative if:

- You want AI observability connected to product analytics, session replay, feature flags, experiments, and more in one platform
- You need to understand not just what your LLM is doing, but how users are interacting with your AI features and where they drop off
- You want open-source, usage-based pricing with no per-seat charges and a generous free tier.

It's completely free to get started – no credit card required. Our [setup wizard](/wizard) handles configuration in minutes, or you can check out [our docs](/docs) to do it yourself.

<WizardCTA />

> ## Frequently asked questions

Reviewer: Do you want to ask Claude to give you a quick "What are the different ways these tools charge and how do they compare" table? I think it would be helpful.

<details>
<summary>What is the difference between AI observability and AI evals?</summary>

[AI observability](/what-is-ai-observability) answers "what is my system doing in production?" capturing traces, latency, token counts, errors, costs, and user interactions. 

AI evals answer "is my system producing good outputs?" scoring responses against defined quality criteria, running test datasets, tracking regressions, and blocking deploys. 

The two are complementary. The best platforms connect both so observability data feeds evaluation.

</details>

<details>
<summary>What is Braintrust used for?</summary>

> **Braintrust** is an AI evaluation and observability platform for teams shipping LLM features to production. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Braintrust** is an AI evaluation and observability platform for teams shipping LLM-powered features to production. 
```

Core use cases include logging production traces, running CI-integrated evaluations, managing prompts, and curating test datasets, all of which are stored in Brainstore, a purpose-built database designed for AI trace data.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Why look for a Braintrust alternative?</summary>

The most common reasons are pricing, self-hosting, and scope. 

Braintrust's paid Pro plan jumps from a generous free tier straight to $249/month with no middle option. Self-hosting requires an enterprise contract. 

And if your primary need is LLM observability integrated with product analytics and user behavior, rather than a specialist eval platform, Braintrust's tight focus works against you.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Is there a free or open-source Braintrust alternative?</summary>

Several. 

- **PostHog** is MIT-licensed with 100k LLM observability events/month free. 
- **Langfuse** is MIT-licensed and fully self-hostable with no usage caps.

> **Arize Phoenix** is source-available under Elastic License 2.0 and free to self-host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Arize Phoenix** is source-available under Elastic License 2.0 and free to self-host.
```

- **Opik by Comet** is Apache 2.0 with a free cloud tier of 25K spans/month.

For more alternatives, check out our guide to the [best open-source LLM observability tools](/blog/best-open-source-llm-observability-tools).

</details>

<details>
<summary>Can PostHog replace Braintrust?</summary>

Yes, for most teams. If your primary need is production AI observability – traces, costs, [evals](/docs/ai-evals), prompt management – connected to product analytics, session replay, and user behavior, PostHog covers it, and adds a layer Braintrust doesn't have at all: measuring whether your AI features actually moved product metrics.

Where PostHog can't replace Braintrust yet is the deep end of the eval workflow: CI-integrated quality gates, dataset curation, and deployment blocking on score regression – but PostHog ships fast and is actively working on closing the gap.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Which Braintrust alternative is best for evals specifically?</summary>

> [LangSmith](/blog/best-langsmith-alternatives) is the closest match for LangChain and LangGraph teams. 

Reviewer: why

> **Confident AI** has the broadest eval metric coverage with 50+ research-backed metrics open-sourced through DeepEval. 

Reviewer: <img width="492" height="284" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ed9d804f-8c3d-4999-bda2-aab1b95909f3" />

```suggestion
**Confident AI** has the broadest eval metric coverage with 45+ research-backed metrics open-sourced through DeepEval. 
```

**Opik** has a strong real-time online evaluation.  

**PostHog** supports [LLM-as-a-judge and code-based evals](/docs/ai-evals) on production generations.

For pure eval depth with CI-integrated quality gates, Braintrust itself remains the strongest option in the space.

</details>

<details>
<summary>What is the cheapest Braintrust alternative?</summary>

For self-hosted options, [Langfuse](/blog/posthog-vs-langfuse), **Arize Phoenix**, and **Opik** are all free to run on your own infrastructure. 

For cloud options, **PostHog** is free up to 100K AI events per month with usage-based pricing after that – no monthly base fee, so low-volume months cost little or nothing. 

> Among fixed paid tiers, **Opik** starts at $19/month, **Langfuse Core** at $29/month, and **Confident AI** at $19.99/seat/month. 

Reviewer: None of these are super relevant and Confident AI is wrong.
```suggestion
```
